1 Installation
Starting with Python 3.13, the official macOS and Windows installers optionally support installing free-threaded
Python binaries. The installers are available at https://www.python.org/downloads/.
For information on other platforms, see the Installing a Free-Threaded Python, a community-maintained installation
guide for installing free-threaded Python.
When building CPython from source, the --disable-gil configure option should be used to build a free-threaded
Python interpreter.
2 Identifying free-threaded Python
To check if the current interpreter supports free-threading, python -VV and sys.version contain “experimental
free-threading build”. The new sys._is_gil_enabled() function can be used to check whether the GIL is
actually disabled in the running process.
The sysconfig.get_config_var("Py_GIL_DISABLED") configuration variable can be used to determine
whether the build supports free threading. If the variable is set to 1, then the build supports free threading. This is
the recommended mechanism for decisions related to the build configuration.
3 The global interpreter lock in free-threaded Python
Free-threaded builds of CPython support optionally running with the GIL enabled at runtime using the environment
variable PYTHON_GIL or the command-line option -X gil.
The GIL may also automatically be enabled when importing a C-API extension module that is not explicitly marked
as supporting free threading. A warning will be printed in this case.
In addition to individual package documentation, the following websites track the status of popular packages support
for free threading:
• https://py-free-threading.github.io/tracking/
• https://hugovk.github.io/free-threaded-wheels/
4 Thread safety
The free-threaded build of CPython aims to provide similar thread-safety behavior at the Python level to the de-
fault GIL-enabled build. Built-in types like dict, list, and set use internal locks to protect against concurrent
modifications in ways that behave similarly to the GIL. However, Python has not historically guaranteed specific
behavior for concurrent modifications to these built-in types, so this should be treated as a description of the current
implementation, not a guarantee of current or future behavior.
® Note
It’s recommended to use the threading.Lock or other synchronization primitives instead of relying on the
internal locks of built-in types, when possible.
5 Known limitations
This section describes known limitations of the free-threaded CPython build.
2
